Java Inheritance

Inheritance is one of the cornerstones of object-oriented programming because it allows 
the creation of hierarchical classifications. Using inheritance, you can create a general class 
that defines traits common to a set of related items. This class can then be inherited by 
other, more specific classes, each adding those things that are unique to it. In the terminology 
of Java, a class that is inherited is called a superclass. The class that does the inheriting is 
called a subclass. Therefore, a subclass is a specialized version of a superclass. It inherits 
all of the members defined by the superclass and adds its own, unique elements.



As you can see, the subclass B includes all of the members of its superclass, A. This is 
why subOb can access i and j and call showij( ). Also, inside sum( ), i and j can be referred 
to directly, as if they were part of B.
Even though A is a superclass for B, it is also a completely independent, stand-alone 
class. Being a superclass for a subclass does not mean that the superclass cannot be used 
by itself. Further, a subclass can be a superclass for another subclass.
The general form of a class declaration that inherits a superclass is shown here:
Chapter 8 Inheritance 163
Part I
class subclass-name extends superclass-name {
 // body of class
}

n the preceding examples, classes derived from Box were not implemented as efficiently 
or as robustly as they could have been. For example, the constructor for BoxWeight
explicitly initializes the width, height, and depth fields of Box. Not only does this duplicate 
code found in its superclass, which is inefficient, but it implies that a subclass must be 
granted access to these members. However, there will be times when you will want to create 
a superclass that keeps the details of its implementation to itself (that is, that keeps its data 
members private). In this case, there would be no way for a subclass to directly access or 
initialize these variables on its own. Since encapsulation is a primary attribute of OOP, it is 
not surprising that Java provides a solution to this problem. Whenever a subclass needs to 
refer to its immediate superclass, it can do so by use of the keyword super.
super has two general forms. The first calls the superclass’ constructor. The second is 
used to access a member of the superclass that has been hidden by a member of a subclass. 
Each use is examined here.